docs/LINTING.md, before:

# Golangci-lint Standardization

This document establishes the standardized approach for golangci-lint usage across the Glance project.

## Standardized Approach

After careful consideration of workflow efficiency, consistency, and best practices, we have established the following standardized approach for golangci-lint invocation:

### Primary Method: Pre-commit Hooks (Local Development)

**For local development and routine code checking, pre-commit hooks are the standard method for running golangci-lint.**

- Developers must install and use pre-commit hooks in their local environment
- golangci-lint is configured in `.pre-commit-config.yaml` as part of the pre-commit hooks
- This method ensures consistent code quality checks before code is committed

### Secondary Method: Official GitHub Action (CI Pipeline)

**For CI workflows, the golangci-lint-action is the standard method for running golangci-lint.**

- CI pipelines use the official golangci-lint GitHub Action
- This provides additional features like caching and detailed reporting optimized for CI environments
- Can be configured to focus on new or changed code for PR checks

Both methods use the same `.golangci.yml` configuration file to ensure consistent linting rules across environments.

## Rationale

This standardization approach was chosen for the following reasons:

1. **Dual Environment Optimization:**
   - Pre-commit hooks provide immediate feedback in the local development environment
   - GitHub Actions provide deeper analysis with better reporting features in CI environments

2. **Consistency with Security Requirements:**
   - Both methods follow security best practices for tool installation
   - Neither approach uses insecure installation methods like curl | sh

3. **Configuration Consistency:**
   - Both approaches use the same `.golangci.yml` configuration file
   - The same linting rules apply in both local and CI environments

4. **Performance Optimization:**
   - Pre-commit hooks are optimized for speed in local environments
   - GitHub Actions leverage caching and parallel execution in CI

## Implementation Details

### Local Development (Pre-commit Hooks)

golangci-lint is configured in `.pre-commit-config.yaml`:

```yaml
- repo: https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint
  rev: v1.57.0  # Definitive version - all other golangci-lint versions should match this
  hooks:
    - id: golangci-lint
      name: golangci-lint
      description: Fast Go linters runner that uses .golangci.yml config
      entry: golangci-lint run
      types: [go]
      language: golang  # Pre-commit manages installation for better reproducibility
      pass_filenames: false
      args: ["--config=.golangci.yml", "--timeout=2m"]  # timeout must match the setting in .golangci.yml
      exclude: '^vendor/|^precommit-tests/'
```

> **Important**: Using `language: golang` allows pre-commit to manage the golangci-lint installation, ensuring consistent versions across all developer environments. This provides better reproducibility compared to the system-installed version.

### CI Pipeline (GitHub Action)

golangci-lint is configured in `.github/workflows/lint.yml`:

```yaml
- name: Install golangci-lint
  uses: golangci/golangci-lint-action@v4
  with:
    # IMPORTANT: This version must match exactly the one in .pre-commit-config.yaml
    version: v1.57.0  # Must match 'rev:' in .pre-commit-config.yaml's golangci-lint hook
    args: --config=.golangci.yml --timeout=2m  # Use same config and timeout as in .golangci.yml
    only-new-issues: true
```

## Configuration and Version Consistency

### Configuration Format

The golangci-lint configuration in `.golangci.yml` follows the modern structure:

1. **Modern Configuration Format**: Using `version: "2"` for compatibility with golangci-lint 1.50.0+
   - Previous versions of golangci-lint (pre-1.50.0) used a legacy format without a version field
   - The modern format requires explicitly setting `version: "2"` for clarity and forward compatibility

2. **Top-level Sections**: The configuration is organized with the following top-level sections:
   - `run:` - For execution settings like timeout, include/exclude paths
   - `linters:` - For enabling/disabling specific linters
   - `linters-settings:` - For configuring individual linter behavior
   - `issues:` - For controlling how issues are reported and filtered

### Version Consistency

To ensure consistency across environments:

1. The golangci-lint version should be specified and kept synchronized between:
   - `.pre-commit-config.yaml` (in the `rev:` field) - this is the single source of truth
   - `.github/workflows/lint.yml` (in the `version:` field) - must match the pre-commit config

2. When updating golangci-lint, both locations must be updated to the same version

3. The timeout setting should be consistent in:
   - `.golangci.yml` (in the `run.timeout` field)
   - `.pre-commit-config.yaml` (in the `args` array)
   - `.github/workflows/lint.yml` (in the `args` field)

## Migration Plan

All existing implementations have been reviewed and align with this standardization. Future changes to linting configuration should follow this established pattern.

## Related Documentation

- [GITHUB_ACTIONS.md](GITHUB_ACTIONS.md) - For details on GitHub Actions workflow configuration
- [PRECOMMIT.md](PRECOMMIT.md) - For details on pre-commit hooks configuration and usage

Commit message:

docs: update all documentation to reference v2.1.2 for golangci-lint
This change ensures all documentation consistently references the
standardized golangci-lint version (v2.1.2) across the codebase.
Updated README.md, LINTING.md, GITHUB_ACTIONS.md, and PRECOMMIT.md
to maintain version consistency.

T034

docs/LINTING.md, after:

# Golangci-lint Standardization

This document establishes the standardized approach for golangci-lint usage across the Glance project.

> **IMPORTANT:** Glance has standardized on golangci-lint **v2.1.2** across all environments.
> This version must be used consistently in local development, pre-commit hooks, and CI workflows.

## Standardized Approach

After careful consideration of workflow efficiency, consistency, and best practices, we have established the following standardized approach for golangci-lint invocation:

### Primary Method: Pre-commit Hooks (Local Development)

**For local development and routine code checking, pre-commit hooks are the standard method for running golangci-lint.**

- Developers must install and use pre-commit hooks in their local environment
- golangci-lint is configured in `.pre-commit-config.yaml` as part of the pre-commit hooks
- This method ensures consistent code quality checks before code is committed

### Secondary Method: Official GitHub Action (CI Pipeline)

**For CI workflows, the golangci-lint-action is the standard method for running golangci-lint.**

- CI pipelines use the official golangci-lint GitHub Action
- This provides additional features like caching and detailed reporting optimized for CI environments
- Can be configured to focus on new or changed code for PR checks

Both methods use the same `.golangci.yml` configuration file to ensure consistent linting rules across environments.

## Rationale

This standardization approach was chosen for the following reasons:

1. **Dual Environment Optimization:**
   - Pre-commit hooks provide immediate feedback in the local development environment
   - GitHub Actions provide deeper analysis with better reporting features in CI environments

2. **Consistency with Security Requirements:**
   - Both methods follow security best practices for tool installation
   - Neither approach uses insecure installation methods like curl | sh

3. **Configuration Consistency:**
   - Both approaches use the same `.golangci.yml` configuration file
   - The same linting rules apply in both local and CI environments

4. **Performance Optimization:**
   - Pre-commit hooks are optimized for speed in local environments
   - GitHub Actions leverage caching and parallel execution in CI

## Implementation Details

### Local Development (Pre-commit Hooks)

golangci-lint is configured in `.pre-commit-config.yaml`:

```yaml
- repo: https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint
  rev: v2.1.2  # Definitive version - all other golangci-lint versions should match this
  hooks:
    - id: golangci-lint
      name: golangci-lint
      description: Fast Go linters runner that uses .golangci.yml config
      entry: golangci-lint run
      types: [go]
      language: golang  # Pre-commit manages installation for better reproducibility
      pass_filenames: false
      args: ["--config=.golangci.yml", "--timeout=2m"]  # timeout must match the setting in .golangci.yml
      exclude: '^vendor/|^precommit-tests/'
```

> **Important**: Using `language: golang` allows pre-commit to manage the golangci-lint installation, ensuring consistent versions across all developer environments. This provides better reproducibility compared to the system-installed version.

### CI Pipeline (GitHub Action)

golangci-lint is configured in `.github/workflows/lint.yml`:

```yaml
- name: Install golangci-lint
  uses: golangci/golangci-lint-action@v4
  with:
    # IMPORTANT: This version must match exactly the one in .pre-commit-config.yaml
    version: v2.1.2  # Must match 'rev:' in .pre-commit-config.yaml's golangci-lint hook
    args: --config=.golangci.yml --timeout=2m  # Use same config and timeout as in .golangci.yml
    only-new-issues: true
```

## Configuration and Version Consistency

### Configuration Format

The golangci-lint configuration in `.golangci.yml` follows the modern structure:

1. **Modern Configuration Format**: Using `version: "2"` for compatibility with golangci-lint v2.x
   - This configuration format is required for golangci-lint v2.x
   - The modern format explicitly sets `version: "2"` for clarity and forward compatibility

2. **Top-level Sections**: The configuration is organized with the following top-level sections:
   - `run:` - For execution settings like timeout, include/exclude paths
   - `linters:` - For enabling/disabling specific linters
   - `linters-settings:` - For configuring individual linter behavior
   - `issues:` - For controlling how issues are reported and filtered

### Version Consistency

To ensure consistency across environments:

1. The golangci-lint version should be specified and kept synchronized between:
   - `.pre-commit-config.yaml` (in the `rev:` field) - this is the single source of truth
   - `.github/workflows/lint.yml` (in the `version:` field) - must match the pre-commit config

2. When updating golangci-lint, both locations must be updated to the same version

3. The timeout setting should be consistent in:
   - `.golangci.yml` (in the `run.timeout` field)
   - `.pre-commit-config.yaml` (in the `args` array)
   - `.github/workflows/lint.yml` (in the `args` field)

## Migration Plan

All existing implementations have been reviewed and align with this standardization. Future changes to linting configuration should follow this established pattern.

## Related Documentation

- [GITHUB_ACTIONS.md](GITHUB_ACTIONS.md) - For details on GitHub Actions workflow configuration
- [PRECOMMIT.md](PRECOMMIT.md) - For details on pre-commit hooks configuration and usage
